DR. A.P.J. ABDUL KALAM TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY, UTTAR PRADESH,
LUCKNOW
EVALUATION SCHEME AND SYLLABI
For
B. Tech. 1ST Year
Common to All Branches
EXCEPT Agriculture Engineering and Biotechnology
Effective from the Session: 2022-23
DR. A.P.J ABDUL KALAM TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY UTTAR PRADESH.
Sec-11, Jankipuram Vistar, Lucknow - 226031, Uttar Pradesh, India
Page 1 of 40

B. Tech. First Year, Semester- I
(All Branches except Agriculture Engineering and Biotechnology)
3- WEEKS STUDENT INDUCTION PROGRAMME
in the beginning of the session
Evaluation Scheme
SN Subject Subject
Code Name
Page 2 of 40
epyT
yrogetaC Sessional
Period Component
)WS(
lanoisseS
)SP/ST(
retsemeS
dnE
noitanimaxE
)ESE( Total Credit
L T P CT TA CT+TA TE/PE SW+ESE Cr
1. BAS101/ Engineering Physics/ T BS 3 1 0 20 10 30 70 100 4
BAS102 Engineering Chemistry
2. BAS103 Engineering T BS 3 1 0 20 10 30 70 100 4
Mathematics-I
3. BEE101/ Fundamentals of T ES 2 1 0 20 10 30 70 100 3
BEC101 Electrical Engineering/
Fundamentals of
Electronics Engineering
4. BCS101/ Programming for T ES 2 1 0 20 10 30 70 100 3
BME101 Problem Solving/
Fundamentals of
Mechanical Engineering
5. BAS104/ Environment and T BS/ 3 0 0 20 10 30 70 100 3
BAS105 Ecology/ Soft Skills HS
6. BAS151/ Engineering Physics P BS 0 0 3 - 50 50 50 100 1
BAS152 Lab/ Engineering
Chemistry Lab
7. BEE151/ Basic Electrical P ES 0 0 3 - 50 50 50 100 1
BEC151 Engineering Lab/ Basic
Electronics Engineering
Lab
8. BCS151/ Programming for P ES/ 0 0 3 - 50 50 50 100 1
BAS155 Problem Solving Lab/ HS
English Language Lab
9. BCE151 Engineering Graphics & P ES 0 1 3 - 50 50 50 100 2
/ Design Lab/ Workshop
BWS151 Practice Lab
13 5 12 350 550 900 22
Abbreviation Used:
BS: Basic Science Course
ES: Engineering Science Course
HS: Humanities and Social Science Course
VA: Value Added Course

B. Tech. First Year, Semester- II
(All Branches except Agriculture Engineering and Biotechnology)
Evaluation Scheme
SN Subject Subject
Code Name
Page 3 of 40
epyT
yrogetaC
Period Sessional
Component
)WS(
lanoisseS
)SP/ST(
retsemeS
dnE
noitanimaxE
)ESE( Total Credit
L T P CT TA CT+TA TE/PE SW+ESE Cr
1. BAS202/ Engineering Chemistry / T BS 3 1 0 20 10 30 70 100 4
BAS201 Engineering Physics
2. BAS203 Engineering T BS 3 1 0 20 10 30 70 100 4
Mathematics-II
3. BEC201/ Fundamentals of T ES 2 1 0 20 10 30 70 100 3
BEE201 Electronics Engineering /
Fundamentals of
Electrical Engineering
4. BME201/ Fundamentals of T ES 2 1 0 20 10 30 70 100 3
BCS201 Mechanical
Engineering/
Programming for
Problem Solving
5. BAS205/ Soft Skills / T HS/ 3 0 0 20 10 30 70 100 3
BAS204 Environment and BS
Ecology
6. BAS252/ Engineering Chemistry P BS 0 0 3 - 50 50 50 100 1
BAS251 Lab / Engineering
Physics Lab
7. BEC251/ Basic Electronics P ES 0 0 3 - 50 50 50 100 1
BEE251 Engineering Lab/
Basic Electrical
Engineering Lab
8. BAS255/ English Language Lab / P HS/ 0 0 3 - 50 50 50 100 1
BCS251 Programming for ES
Problem Solving Lab
9. BWS251/ Workshop Practice Lab P ES 0 1 3 - 50 50 50 100 2
BCE251 / Engineering Graphics
& Design Lab
10. BVA251/ Sports and Yoga / P VA 0 0 3 100 *100 *100
0
BVA252 NSS
13 5 12+ 350+ 550 900+ 22
3* *100 *100
*Compulsory Qualifying Audit Course
Abbreviation Used:
BS: Basic Science Course
ES: Engineering Science Course
HS: Humanities and Social Science Course
VA: Value Added Course
Summer Internship (4-week) / NPTEL Course (4-week) during summer break
after Semester-II and same will be assessed/evaluated in the Semester-III

DETAILED SYLLABI
B. Tech. First Year
(All Branches except Agriculture Engineering and Biotechnology)
Effective from Session 2022-23
Page 4 of 40

BAS101 / BAS201: ENGINEERING PHYSICS
Contact
Content
Hours
Unit-1: Quantum Mechanics 9
Inadequacy of classical mechanics, Planck’s theory of black body radiation(qualitative),
Compton effect, de-Broglie concept of matter waves, Davisson and Germer Experiment,
Phase velocity and group velocity, Time-dependent and time-independent Schrodinger
wave equations, Physical interpretation of wave function, Particle in a one-Dimensional
box.
Unit-2: Electromagnetic Field Theory 8
Basic concept of Stoke’s theorem and Divergence theorem, Basic laws of electricity and
magnetism, Continuity equation for current density, Displacement current, Maxwell
equations in integral and differential form, Maxwell equations in vacuum and in
conducting medium, Poynting vector and Poynting theorem, Plane electromagnetic
waves in vacuum and their transverse nature. Relation between electric and magnetic
fields of an electromagnetic wave, Plane electromagnetic waves in conducting medium,
Skin depth.
Unit-3: Wave Optics 10
Coherent sources, Interference in uniform and wedge shaped thin films, Necessity of
extended sources, Newton’s Rings and its applications, Introduction to diffraction,
Fraunhoffer diffraction at single slit and double slit, Absent spectra, Diffraction grating,
Spectra with grating, Dispersive power, Resolving power, Rayleigh’s criterion of
resolution, Resolving power of grating.
Unit-4: Fiber Optics & Laser 9
Fibre Optics: Principle and construction of optical fiber, Acceptance angle, Numerical
aperture, Acceptance cone, Step index and graded index fibers, Fiber optic
communication principle, Attenuation, Dispersion, Application of fiber.
Laser: Absorption of radiation, Spontaneous and stimulated emission of radiation,
Population inversion, Einstein’s Coefficients, Principles of laser action, Solid state Laser
(Ruby laser) and Gas Laser (He-Ne laser), Laser applications.
Unit-5: Superconductors and Nano-Materials: 8
Superconductors: Temperature dependence of resistivity in superconducting
materials, Meissner effect, Temperature dependence of critical field, Persistent current,
Type I and Type II superconductors, High temperature superconductors, Properties and
Applications of Super-conductors.
Nano-Materials: Introduction and properties of nano materials, Basics concept of
Quantum Dots, Quantum wires and Quantum well, Fabrication of nano materials -Top-
Down approach (CVD) and Bottom-Up approach (Sol Gel), Properties and Application of
nano materials.
Page 5 of 40

Course Outcomes:
On completion of course the students are able :
Bloom’s
CO CO Statement
Level
To explain the distribution of energy in black body radiation and to understand the
Understanding,
CO1 difference in particle and wave nature with explanation of Compton effect and
Apply
Schrodinger wave equation.
To understand the concept of displacement current and consistency of Ampere’s law and
Understanding,
CO2 also the properties of electromagnetic waves in different medium with the use of
Analyze
Maxwell’s equations.
To understand the behavior of waves through various examples/applications of Apply
CO3 interference and diffraction phenomenon and the concept of grating and resolving
power.
To know the functioning of optical fiber and its properties and applications. To Understanding,
CO4
understand the concept, properties and applications of Laser. Apply
To know the properties and applications of superconducting materials and nano Understanding
CO5
materials.
Reference Books:
1. Concepts of Modern Physics - Aurthur Beiser (Mc-Graw Hill)
2. Optics - Brijlal & Subramanian (S. Chand )
3. Engineering Physics: Theory and Practical- Katiyar and Pandey (Wiley India)
4. Applied Physics for Engineers- Neeraj Mehta (PHI Learning, New)
5. Engineering Physics-Malik HK and Singh AK (Mc Graw Hill)
Page 6 of 40

BAS102 / BAS202: ENGINEERING CHEMISTRY
Course Objectives:
1. To enable the students to understand about the Chemistry of Atomic and Molecular structure, Chemistry of
advanced Materials like Liquid crystals, Nanomaterials, Graphite & fullerenes and Green Chemistry.
2. To enable the students to understand and apply the detailed concepts of spectroscopic techniques and
stereochemistry to identify the compounds, element etc.
3. To enable the students to understand and apply the concepts related to Electrochemistry, Batteries, Corrosion
and Chemistry of Engineering Materials like cement.
4. To enable the students to understand and apply detailed concepts of water source, water impurities, hardness
of water and boiler troubles used in industry as well as analysis of coal & determination of calorific values.
5. To enable the students to understand detailed concepts related to polymers, Polymerization, Polymer Blends
and Polymer Composites.
Contact
Content
Hours
Unit-1: 8
Atomic and Molecular Structure: Molecular orbital’s of diatomic molecules, Bond Order,
Magnetic characters and numerical problems.
Chemistry of Advanced Materials:
Liquid Crystals; Introduction, Types and Applications of liquid crystals, Industrially
important materials used as liquid crystals.
Graphite and Fullerene; Introduction, Structure and applications.
Nanomaterials; Introduction, Preparation, characteristics of nanomaterials and applications
of nanomaterials, Carbon Nano Tubes (CNT),
Green Chemistry: Introduction, 12 principles and importance of green Synthesis, Green
Chemicals, Synthesis of typical organic compounds by conventional and Green route (Adipic
acid and Paracetamol), Environmental impact of Green chemistry on society.
Unit-2: 8
Spectroscopic Techniques and Applications: Elementary idea and simple applications of
UV, IR and NMR, Numerical problems.
Stereochemistry: Optical isomerism in compounds without chiral carbon, Geometrical
isomerism, Chiral Drugs.
Unit-3: 8
Electrochemistry and Batteries: Basic concepts of electrochemistry.
Batteries; Classification and applications of Primary Cells (Dry Cell) and Secondary Cells
(Lead Acid battery).
Corrosion: Introduction to corrosion, Types of corrosion, Cause of corrosion, Corrosion
prevention and control, Corrosion issues in specific industries (Power generation, Chemical
processing industry, Oil & gas industry and Pulp & paper industries).
Chemistry of Engineering Materials:
Cement; Constituents, manufacturing, hardening and setting, deterioration of cement, Plaster
of Paris (POP).
Page 7 of 40

Unit-4: 8
Water Technology: Sources and impurities of water, Hardness of water, Boiler troubles,
Techniques for water softening (Lime-Soda, Zeolite, Ion Exchange and Reverse Osmosis
process), Determination of Hardness and alkalinity, Numerical problems.
Fuels and Combustion: Definition, Classification, Characteristics of a good fuel, Calorific
Values, Gross & Net calorific value, Determination of calorific value by Bomb Calorimeter,
Theoretical calculation of calorific value by Dulong’s method, Ranking of Coal, Analysis of coal
by Proximate and Ultimate analysis method, Numerical problems, Chemistry of Biogas
production from organic waste materials and their environmental impact on society.
Unit-5: 8
Materials Chemistry:
Polymers; Classification, Polymerization processes, Thermosetting and Thermoplastic
Polymers, Polymer Blends and Composites, Conducting and Biodegradable polymers,
Preparation, properties, industrial applications of Teflon, Lucite, Bakelite, Kelvar, Dacron,
Thiokol, Nylon, Buna-N and Buna-S and their environmental impact on society, Speciality
polymers.
Organometallic Compounds: General methods of preparation and applications of
Organometallic compounds (RMgX and LiAlH ).
4
Course Outcomes:
Upon completion of the course the student should be able to:
Units Course Outcomes Bloom’s
Level
CO-1 Get an understanding of the theoretical principles of chemistry of molecular structure, bonding and K3
properties, Chemistry of advanced materials (liquid crystals, Nanomaterials, Graphite & Fullerene) as
well as the Principles of Green Chemistry.
CO-2 Apply the fundamental concepts of determination of structure with various spectral techniques and K4
stereochemistry.
CO-3 Utilize the theory of construction of electrodes, batteries and fuel cells in redesigning new engineering K3
products and categorize the reasons for corrosion and study methods to control corrosion and develop
understanding of Chemistry of Engineering materials (Cement).
CO-4 Develop understanding of the sources, impurities and hardness of water, apply the concepts of K3
determination of calorific values and analyze the coal.
CO-5 Develop the understanding of Chemical structure of polymers and its effect on their various properties K3
when used as engineering materials. Understanding the applications of specific polymers and Chemistry
applicable in industrial process.
Reference Books:
1. Engineering Chemistry by Rath & Singh, 2nd Edition, Cengage Learning India Pvt Ltd Delhi.
2. Engineering Chemistry by SS Dara, S Chand & Co Ltd
3. Engineering Chemistry by Jain & Jain, S.Chand & Comp, New Delhi
4. Engineering Chemistry by K. Sesha Maheswaramma, Pearson
5. Engineering Chemistry by OG Palanna, Mc Graw Hill Education, New Delhi
6. Engineering Chemistry by Shashi Chawala, Dhanpat Rai Publishing Comp, New Delhi
7. University Chemistry by BH Mahan
8. University Chemistry by CNR Rao
Page 8 of 40

BAS103 : ENGINEERING MATHEMATICS-I
Course Objectives:
The objective of this course is to familiarize the graduate engineers with techniques in matrix, calculus,
multivariate analysis and vector calculus. It aims to equip the students with standard concepts and tools from
intermediate to advanced level that will enable them to tackle more advanced level of mathematics and
applications that they would find useful in their disciplines.
The students will learn:
• The essential tools of matrices, Eigen values and its application in a Comprehensive- - m anner.
• To apply the knowledge of differential calculus in the field of engineering.
• To deal with functions of several variables that is essential in optimizing the results ofr eal life
problems.
• To apply integral calculus in various field of engineering and have a basicu nderstanding of Beta and
Gamma functions and application of Dirichlet’s integral.
• To deal with vector calculus that is required in different branches of Engineering tog raduate
engineer.
Contact
Content
Hours
Unit-1: Matrices 8
Elementary transformations, Inverse of a matrix, Rank of matrix, Solution of system of
linear equations, Characteristic equation, Cayley-Hamilton Theorem and its application,
Linear Dependence and Independence of vectors, Eigen values and Eigen vectors, Complex
Matrices, Hermitian, Skew-Hermitian and Unitary Matrices, Applications to Engineering
problems.
Unit-2: Differential Calculus- I 8
Successive Differentiation (nth order derivatives), Leibnitz theorem, Curve tracing,
Partial derivatives, Euler’s Theorem for homogeneous functions, Total derivative, Change
of variables.
Unit-3: Differential Calculus-II 8
Expansion of functions by Taylor’s and Maclaurin’s theorems for functions of one and two
variables, Maxima and Minima of functions of several variables, Lagrange’s method of
multipliers, Jacobians, Approximation of errors.
Unit-4: Multiple integration 8
Double integral, Triple integral, Change ofo rder of integration, Change of variables, Beta and
Gama function and their properties, Dirichlet’s integral and its applications to area and
volume, Liouville’s extensions of Dirichlet’s integral.
Unit-5: Vector Calculus 8
Vector differentiation: Gradient, Curl and Divergence and their Physical interpretation,
Directional derivatives.
Vector Integration: Line integral, Surface integral, Volume integral, Gauss’s Divergence
theorem, Green’s theorem and Stoke’s theorem (without proof) and their applications.
Page 9 of 40

Course Outcomes:
Course Outcome (CO) Bloom’s
Level
At the end of this course, the students will be able to:
Understand the concept of complex matrices, Eigen values, Eigen vectors and apply
CO 1 K2 & K5
the concept of rank to evaluate linear simultaneous equations
Remember the concept of differentiation to find successive differentiation,
CO 2 K1,K6 & K5
Leibnitz Theorem, and create c urve tracing, and find partial and total derivatives
Applying the concept of partial differentiation to evaluate extrema, series expansion,
CO 3 K3 &K5
error approximation off unctions and Jacobians
Remember the concept of Beta and Gamma function; analyze area and v olume and
CO 4 K1 & K4
Dirichlet’s theorem in multiple integral
Apply the concept of Vector Calculus to analyze and evaluate directionald erivative, K3, K4& K5
CO 5 line, surface and volume integrals.
K1 – Remember, K2 – Understand, K3 – Apply, K4 – Analyze, K5 – Evaluate, K6 – Create
Text Books:
1.B. V. Ramana, Higher Engineering Mathematics, McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd.,2 008.
2.B. S. Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Khanna Publisher, 2005.
3.R K. Jain & S R K. Iyenger, Advance Engineering Mathematics, Narosa Publishing House2 002.
Reference Books:
1. E. Kreyszig, Advance Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
2. Peter V. O’Neil, Advance Engineering Mathematics, Thomson (Cengage) Learning, 2007.
3. Maurice D. Weir, Joel Hass, Frank R. Giordano, Thomas, Calculus, Eleventh Edition,P earson.
4. D. Poole, Linear Algebra: A Modern Introduction, 2nd Edition, Brooks/Cole, 2005.
5. Veerarajan T., Engineering Mathematics for first year, McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 2008.
6. Ray Wylie C and Louis C Barret, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, McGraw-Hill;S ixth
Edition.
7. P. Sivaramakrishna Das and C. Vijayakumari, Engineering Mathematics, 1st Edition,P earson
Education.
8. Advanced Engineering Mathematics. Chandrika Prasad, Reena Garg, 2018.
Page 10 of 40

BAS203 : ENGINEERING MATHEMATICS-II
Course Objectives:
The objective of this course is to familiarize the prospective engineers with techniques in ordinary
differential equations, Laplace transform, sequence and series,Fourier series and complex
variables. It aims to equip the students to deal with advanced level of mathematics and applications
that would be essential for their disciplines.
The students will learn:
• The effective mathematical tools for the solutions of differential equations that model
physical processes.
• The basic knowledge of Laplace transform and its applications in solving differential
equations.
• The tool for convergence of series and expansion of function using Fourier series for
learning advanced Engineering Mathematics.
• The tools of differentiation of functions of complex variables that are used in various
techniques dealing with engineering problems.
• The tools of integration of functions of complex variables that are used in various
techniques dealing with engineering problems.
Contact
Content
Hours
Unit -1: Ordinary Differential Equation of Higher Order 8
Linear differential equation of nth order with constant coefficients, Simultaneous
linear differential equations, Second order linear differential equations with variable
coefficients, Solution by changing independent variable, Method of variation of
parameters, Cauchy-Euler equation, Application of differential equations in solving
engineering problems.
Unit-2: Laplace Transform 10
Laplace transform, Existence theorem, Properties of Laplace Transform, Laplace
transform of derivates and integrals, Unit step function, Laplace transform of
periodic function, Inverse Laplace transform, Convolution theorem. Application of
Laplace Transform to solve ordinary differential equations and simultaneous
differential equations.
Unit-3: Sequence and Series 8
Definition of Sequence and series with examples, Convergence of series, Tests for
convergence of series, Ratio test, D’ Alembert’s test, Raabe’s test, Comparison test.
Fourier series, Half range Fourier sine and cosine series.
Unit-4: Complex Variable–Differentiation 8
Functions of complex variable, Limit, Continuity and differentiability, Analytic
functions, Cauchy- Riemann equations (Cartesian and Polar form), Harmonic
function, Method to find Analytic functions, Milne’s Thompson Method, Conformal
mapping, Mobius transformation and their properties.
Unit-5: Complex Variable –Integration 8
Complex integration, Cauchy- Integral theorem, Cauchy integral formula, Taylor’s
and Laurent’s series, singularities and its classification, zeros of analytic functions,
Residues, Cauchy’s Residue theorem and its application.
Page 11 of 40

Course Outcomes:
Course Outcome (CO) Bloom’s
Level
At the end of this course, the students will be able to:
Remember the concept differentiation to evaluate LDE of nth order with constant
CO 1 K1 &K5
coefficient and LDE with variable coefficient of 2nd order.
Understand and apply the concept of Laplace Transform to evaluate differential
CO 2 K2 ,K3 & K5
equations
Understand the concept of convergence to analyze the convergence of series and
CO 3 K2 & K4
expansion of t he function for Fourier series.
Apply the concept of analyticity, Harmonic function and create thei mage of
CO 4 K3, K6& K3
function applying conformal transformation
Apply the concept of Cauchy Integral theorem, Cauchy Integral formula, K3& K5
CO 5 singularity and calculus of residue to evaluate integrals
K1 – Remember, K2 – Understand, K3 – Apply, K4 – Analyze, K5 – Evaluate, K6 – Create
Text Books:
1. B. V. Ramana, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company
Ltd., 2008.
2. B. S. Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Khanna Publisher, 2005.
3. R. K. Jain & S. R. K. Iyenger, Advance Engineering Mathematics , Narosa Publishing -
House, 2002
Reference Books:
1. E. Kreyszig, Advance Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
2. Peter V. O’Neil, Advance Engineering Mathematics, Thomson (Cengage) Learning, 2007.
3. Maurice D. Weir, Joel Hass, Frank R.Giordano, Thomas, Calculus, Eleventh Edition,
Pearson.
4. G.B Thomas, R L Finney, Calculus and Analytical Geometry, Ninth Edition Pearson, 2002.
5. James Ward Brown and Ruel V Churchill, Fourier Series and Boundary Value Problems,
8th Edition-McGraw-Hill
6. D. Poole, Linear Algebra: A Modern Introduction, 2nd Edition, Brooks/Cole, 2005.
7. Veerarajan T., Engineering Mathematics for first year, McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 2008.
8. Charles E Roberts Jr, Ordinary Diffrential Equations, Application, Model and Computing,
CRC Press T&F Group.
9.Ray Wylie C and Louis C Barret, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 6thEdition, McGraw-
Hill.
10.James Ward Brown and Ruel V Churchill, Complex Variable and Applications, 8th Edition,
McGraw-Hill.
11. P. Sivaramakrishna Das and C. Vijayakumari, Engineering Mathematics, 1st Edition,
Pearson India Education Services Pvt. Ltd.
12.Advanced Engineering Mathematics By Chandrika Prasad, Reena Garg Khanna Publishing
House, Delhi.
13. Laplace Transforms by Schaum’s series, 2005 Edition, Spiegel Publicaiton.
Page 12 of 40

BEE101 / BEE201: FUNDAMENTALS OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Contact
Content
Hours
Unit -1: DC Circuits 6
Electrical circuit elements (R, L and C), Concept of active and passive elements,
voltage and current sources, concept of linearity, unilateral and bilateral elements.
Kirchhoff‟s laws, Mesh and nodal methods of analysis.
Unit-2: : Steady State Analysis of Single Phase AC Circuits 6
Representation of Sinusoidal waveforms – Average and effective values, Form and
peak factors.
Analysis of single phase AC Circuits consisting R-L-C combination (Series and
Parallel) Apparent, active & reactive power, Power factor. Concept of Resonance in
series & parallel circuits, bandwidth and quality factor.
Three phase balanced circuits, voltage and current relations in star and delta
connections.
Unit-3: Transformers 6
Magnetic circuits, ideal and practical transformer, equivalent circuit, losses in
transformers, regulation and efficiency.
Unit-4: Electrical machines 8
DC machines: Principle & Construction, Types, EMF equation of generator and
torque equation of motor, applications of DC motors (simple numerical problems)
Three Phase Induction Motor: Principle & Construction, Types, Slip-torque
characteristics, Applications (Numerical problems related to slip only)
Single Phase Induction motor: Principle of operation and introduction to methods of
starting, applications.
Three Phase Synchronous Machines: Principle of operation of alternator and
synchronous motor and their applications.
Unit-5: Electrical Installations 4
Introduction of Switch Fuse Unit (SFU), MCB, ELCB, MCCB, ACB. Types of Wires,
Cables and Bus-bars. Fundamentals of earthing and lightning protection. Types of
Batteries
.
Page 13 of 40

Course Outcomes:
Course Outcome (CO)
CO 1 Apply the concepts of KVL/KCL and network theorems in solving DC circuits.
CO 2 Analyze the steady state behavior of single phase and three phase AC electrical circuits.
Identify the application areas of a single phase two winding transformer as well as an auto
CO 3 transformer and calculate their efficiency. Also identify the connections of a three phase
transformer.
Illustrate the working principles of induction motor, synchronous machine as well as DC
CO 4
machine and employ them in different area of applications.
Describe the components of low voltage electrical installations and perform elementary
CO 5
calculations for energy consumption.
Text Books:
1. Ritu Sahdev, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, Khanna Publishing House, 2018.
2. P.V. Prasad, S.Sivanagaraju,“Electrical Engineering:Concepts and Applications” Cengage, 2018
3. D. P. Kothari and I. J. Nagrath, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2010.
4. D. C. Kulshreshtha, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, McGraw Hill, 2009.
Reference Books:
1. E. Hughes, “Electrical and Electronics Technology”, Pearson, 2010.
2. L. S. Bobrow, “Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering”, Oxford University Press, 2011.
3. V. D. Toro, “Electrical Engineering Fundamentals”, Pearson India, 1989.
Spoken Tutorial (MOOCs):
1. AC DC Circuit Analysis using NgSpice, Open Source Software (http://spoken-tutorial.org)
Page 14 of 40

BEC101 / BEC201 : FUNDAMENTALS OF ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING
Contact
Topics
Hours
Unit-1 8
Semiconductor Diode: Depletion layer, V-I characteristics, ideal and practical Diodes,
Diode Equivalent Circuits, Zener Diodes breakdown mechanism (Zener and avalanche)
Diode Application: Diode Configuration, Half and Full Wave rectification, Clippers,
Clampers, Zener diode as shunt regulator, Voltage-Multiplier Circuits
Special Purpose two terminal Devices: Light-Emitting Diodes, Photo Diodes, Varactor
Diodes, Tunnel Diodes.
Unit-2 8
Bipolar Junction Transistor: Transistor Construction, Operation, Amplification
action. Common Base, Common Emitter, Common Collector Configuration
Field Effect Transistor: Construction and Characteristic of JFETs. Transfer
Characteristic. MOSFET (MOS) (Depletion and Enhancement) Type, Transfer
Characteristic.
Unit-3 8
Operational Amplifiers: Introduction, Op-Amp basic, Practical Op-Amp Circuits
(Inverting Amplifier, Non-inverting Amplifier, Unit Follower, Summing Amplifier,
Integrator, Differentiator).Differential and Common-Mode Operation, Comparators.
Unit-4 8
Digital Electronics: Number system & representation, Binary arithmetic, Introduction of
Basic and Universal Gates, using Boolean algebra simplification of Boolean function. K Map
Minimization upto 6 Variables.
Unit-5 8
Fundamentals of Communication Engineering: Basics of signal representation and
analysis, Electromagnetic spectrum Elements of a Communication System, Need of
modulation and typical applications, Fundamentals of amplitude modulation and
demodulation techniques.
Introduction to Wireless Communication: Overview of wireless communication,
cellular communication, different generations and standards in cellular communication
systems, Fundamentals of Satellite & Radar Communication.
Course Outcomes:
At the end of this course students will demonstrate the ability to:
1. Describe the concept of PN Junction and devices.
2. Explain the concept of BJT, FET and MOFET.
3. Apply the concept of Operational amplifier to design linear and non-linear applications.
4. Perform number systems conversions, binary arithmetic and minimize logic functions.
5. Describe the fundamentals of communication technologies.
Page 15 of 40

Text Books:
1. Robert L. Boylestand / Louis Nashelsky “Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory”, Pearson
Education.
2. George Kennedy, “Electronic Communication Systems”, McGrawPublication
3. David A. Bell, “Electronic Devices and Circuits”, Oxford UniversityPress.
4. Jacob Millman, C.C. Halkias, StayabrataJit, “Electronic Devices and Circuits”, McGrawHill.
5. A. Anand Kumar, “Fundamental of Digital Circuits,” PHI 4th edition, 2018.
Page 16 of 40

BCS101 / BCS201: PROGRAMMING FOR PROBLEM SOLVING
Contact
Content Hours
8
Unit -1:
Introduction to Components of a Computer System: Memory, Processor, I/O
Devices, Storage, Operating System, Concept of Assembler, Compiler, Interpreter,
Loader and Linker.
Idea of Algorithm: Representation of Algorithm, Flowchart, Pseudo Code with
Examples, From Algorithms to Programs, Source Code.
Programming Basics: Structure of C Program, Writing and Executing the First C
Program, Syntax and Logical Errors in Compilation, Object and Executable Code.
Components of C Language. Standard I/O in C , Fundamental Data types, Variables
and Memory Locations, Storage Classes.
8
Unit-2:
Arithmetic Expressions and Precedence : Operators and Expression Using
Numeric and Relational Operators, Mixed Operands, Type Conversion, Logical
Operators, Bit Operations, Assignment Operator, Operator precedence and
Associatively.
Conditional Branching: Applying if and Switch Statements, Nesting if and Else
and Switch.
8
Unit-3:
Iteration and Loops: Use of While, do While and for Loops, Multiple Loop
Variables, Use of Break , Goto and Continue Statements.
Arrays: Array Notation and Representation, Manipulating Array Elements, using
Multi Dimensional Arrays. Character Arrays and Strings, Structure, union,
Enumerated Data types, Array of Structures, Passing Arrays to Functions.
8
Unit-4:
Functions: Introduction, Types of Functions, Functions with Array, Passing
Parameters to Functions, Call by Value, Call by Reference, Recursive Functions.
Basic of searching and Sorting Algorithms: Searching & Sorting Algorithms (
Linear Search , Binary search , Bubble Sort, Insertion and Selection Sort)
8
Unit-5:
Pointers: Introduction, Declaration, Applications, Introduction to Dynamic Memory
Allocation (Malloc, Calloc, Realloc, Free), String and String functions , Use of Pointers
in Self-Referential Structures, Notion of Linked List (No Implementation)
File Handling: File I/O Functions, Standard C Preprocessors, Defining and Calling
Macros and Command-Line Arguments.
Page 17 of 40

Course Outcome:
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s
Level
At the End of Course , the Student will be Able to Understand
CO 1 To Develop Simple Algorithms for Arithmetic and Logical Problems. K , K
2 3
CO 2 To Translate the Algorithms to Programs & Execution (in C Language). K
3
CO 3 To Implement Conditional Branching, Iteration and Recursion. K
3
To Decompose a Problem into Functions and Synthesize a Complete Program
CO 4 K
Using Divide and Conquer Approach. 4
CO 5 To Use Arrays, Pointers and Structures to Develop Algorithms and Programs. K , K
2 3
K - Remember, K - Understand, K - Apply, K - Analyze , K - Evaluate , K - Create
1 2 3 4 5 6
Text Books:
1. Schaum's Outline of Programming with C by Byron Gottfried , McGraw-Hill
2. The C programming by Kernighan Brain W. and Ritchie Dennis M., Pearson Education .
3. Computer Basics and C Programming by V.Rajaraman , PHI Learning Pvt. Limited, 2015.
4. Computer Concepts and Programming in C, E Balaguruswami, McGraw Hill
5. Computer Science- A Structured Programming Approach Using C, by Behrouz A. Forouzan,
Richard F. Gilberg, Thomson, Third Edition , Cengage Learning - 2007.
6. Let Us C By Yashwant P. Kanetkar.
7. Problem Solving and Program Design in C, by Jeri R. Hanly, Elliot B. Koffman, Pearson Addison-
Wesley, 2006.
8. Programming in C by Kochan Stephen G. Pearson Education – 2015.
9. Computer Concepts and Programming in C by D.S. Yadav and Rajeev Khanna, New Age
International Publication.
10. Computer Concepts and Programming by Anami, Angadi and Manvi, PHI Publication
11. Computer Concepts and Programming in C by Vikas Gupta, Wiley India Publication
12. Computer Fundamentals and Programming in C. Reema Thareja, Oxford Publication
Page 18 of 40

BME101 / BME201: FUNDAMENTALS OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
Contact
Content
Hours
Unit -1: Introduction to Mechanics 8
Force moment and couple, principle of transmissibility, Varignon's theorem. Resultant
of force system- concurrent and non-concurrent coplanar forces, Types of supports
(Hinge, Roller) and loads (Point, UDL, UVL), free body diagram, equilibrium
equations and Support Reactions.
Normal and shear Stress, strain, Hookes’ law, Poisson’s ratio, elastic constants and
their relationship, stress-strain diagram for ductile and brittle materials, factor of
safety.
Unit-2: Introduction to IC Engines and Electric Vehicles 8
IC Engine:Basic definition of engine and Components, Construction and Working of
Two stroke and four stroke SI & CI engine, merits and demerits, scavenging process;
difference between two-stroke and four stroke IC engines and SI and CI Engines.
Electric vehicles and hybrid vehicles: Components of an EV, EV batteries,
chargers, drives, transmission and power devices. Advantages and disadvantages of
EVs. Hybrid electric vehicles, HEV drive train components, advantages of HV.
Unit-3: Introduction to Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning 8
Refrigeration: Refrigerating effect, Ton of Refrigeration; Coefficient of performance,
methods of refrigeration, construction and working of domestic refrigerator, concept
of heat pump.
Air-Conditioning: Its meaning and application, humidity, dry bulb, wet bulb, and
dew point temperatures, comfort conditions, construction and working of window air
conditioner.
Unit-4: Introduction to Fluid Mechanics and Applications 8
Introduction: Fluids properties, pressure, density, dynamic and kinematic viscosity,
specific gravity, Newtonian and Non-Newtonian fluid, Pascal’s Law and Continuity
Equation.
Working principles of hydraulic turbines (Pelton Wheel and Francis)& pumps
(Centrifugal and Reciprocating) and their classifications and hydraulic lift.
Unit-5: Introduction to Measurement and Mechatronics 12
Introduction to Measurement: Concept of Measurement, Error in measurements,
Calibration, measurements of pressure(Bourdon Tube Pressure and U-Tube
Manometer), temperature(Thermocouple and Optical Pyrometer), mass flow
rate(Venturi Meter and Orifice Meter), strain(Bonded and Unbonded Strain Gauge),
force (Proving Ring) and torques(Prony Brake Dynamometer); Concepts of accuracy,
precision and resolution.
Introduction to Mechatronic Systems: Evolution, Scope, Advantages and
disadvantages of Mechatronics, Industrial applications of Mechatronics, Introduction
to autotronics, bionics, and avionics and their applications. Sensors and Transducers:
Types of sensors, types of transducers and their characteristics.
Page 19 of 40

Overview of Mechanical Actuation System – Kinematic Chains, Cam, Ratchet
Mechanism, Gears and its type, Belt, Bearing.
Hydraulic and Pneumatic Actuation Systems: Overview: Pressure Control
Valves, Direction Control Valves, Rotary Actuators, Accumulators and Pneumatic
Sequencing Problems.
Course Outcomes:
Blooms
The students will be able to
Level
Apply the concept of force resolution and stress and strain to solve basic
CO1 K3
problems
Understand the construction details and working of internal combustion
CO2 K2
engines, electric vehicle and hybrid vehicles.
Explain the construction detail and working of refrigerator, heat pump and air-
CO3 K2
conditioner.
Understand fluid properties, conservation laws and hydraulic machinery used
CO4 K2
in real life.
Understand the working principle of different measuring instrument and
CO5 K2
mechatronics with their advantages, scope and Industrial application.
Reference Books:
1.Basic Mechanical Engineering, G Shanmugam, S Ravindran, McGraw Hill
2.Basic Mechanical Engineering, M P Poonia and S C Sharma, Khanna Publishers
3.Mechatronics : Principles, Concepts and Applications, Nitaigour Mahalik, McGraw Hill
4.Mechatronics, As per AICTE: Integrated Mechanical Electronic Systems, K.P. Ramachandran,
G.K. Vijayaraghavan, M.S.Balasundaram, Wiley India
5.Mechanical Measurements & Control, Dr. D. S. Kumar. Metropolitan Book Company
6.Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, Mahesh Kumar, Pearson India
Page 20 of 40

BAS104 / BAS204: ENVIRONMENT AND ECOLOGY
Course Objectives:
1. Aims and objectives of environmental education emphasize the relationship between man and
the environment and educate young people about the importance of nature and the
environment.
2. Environmental education aims to impart ecological knowledge and promote environmentally
conscious behavior towards nature.
3. It encourages young minds to take responsibility for protecting the natural environment
protection through information and knowledge and to develop environmental awareness.
4. Incidentally, promoting awareness and a sense of respect for nature leads to a comprehensive
understanding of the environment and a reasonable attitude towards protecting it.
5. The focus of environmental education is Awareness, Knowledge, Attitude, Skills, Capacity Building
and Participation.
Contact
Topics
Hours
Unit-1 8
Environment: Definition, Types of Environment, Components of environment,
Segments of environment, Scope and importance, Need for Public Awareness.
Ecosystem: Definition, Types of ecosystem, Structure of ecosystem, Food Chain,
Food Web, Ecological pyramid. Balance Ecosystem.
Effects of Human Activities such as Food, Shelter, Housing, Agriculture, Industry,
Mining, Transportation, Economic and Social security on
Environment, Environmental Impact Assessment, Sustainable Development.
Unit-2 8
Natural Resources: Introduction, Classification.
Water Resources; Availability, sources and Quality Aspects, Water Borne
and Water Induced Diseases, Fluoride and Arsenic Problems in Drinking Water.
Mineral Resources; Material Cycles; Carbon, Nitrogen and Sulfur cycles.
Energy Resources; Conventional and Non conventional Sources of Energy.
Forest Resources; Availability, Depletion of Forests, Environment impact of
forest depletion on society.
Unit-3 8
Pollution and their Effects; Public Health Aspects of Environmental;
Water Pollution, Air Pollution, Soil Pollution, Noise Pollution, Solid waste
management.
Unit-4 8
Current Environmental Issues of Importance; Global Warming, Green
House Effects, Climate Change, Acid Rain, Ozone Layer Formation and Depletion,
Population Growth and Automobile pollution, Burning of paddy straw.
Page 21 of 40

Unit-5 8
Environmental Protection; Environmental Protection Act 1986, Initiatives
by Non Governmental Organizations (NGO’s), Human Population and the
Environment: Population growth, Environmental Education, Women
Education.
Course Outcomes:
Upon completion of the course, the student will be able to:
Bloom’s
Course Outcomes Level
CO-1 Gain in-depth knowledge on natural processes that sustain life, and govern K2
economy.
CO-2 Estimate and Predict the consequences of human actions on the web of life, global K3
economy and quality of human life.
CO-3 Develop critical thinking for shaping strategies (scientific, social, economic and legal) K4
for environmental protection and conservation of biodiversity, social equity and
sustainable development.
CO-4 Acquire values and attitudes towards understanding complex environmental- K3
economic social challenges, and participate actively in solving current
environmental problems and preventing the future ones.
CO-5 Adopt sustainability as a practice in life, society and industry. K3
Reference Books:
1. Textbook of Environment and Ecology by Dave, Katewa & Singh, 2nd Edition, Cengage Learning
India Pvt Ltd Delhi.
2. Environmental Studies by S Deswal, Dhanpat Rai & Co.
3. Environmental Studies by VK Ahluwalia, 2nd Edition,TERI Press, New Delhi.
4. Environmental Studies by R Rajgopalan, Oxford University Press.
5. Environment & Ecology by Singh & Malviya, Acme Learning
Page 22 of 40

BAS105 / BAS205: SOFT SKILLS
Course Objectives:
1. Students will be enabled to understand the correct usage of grammar.
2. Students will be able to converse well with effective speaking and listening skills in English.
3. Students will be able to create substantial base by the formation of strong professional
vocabulary for its application at different platforms and through numerous modes as
Comprehension, reading and writing
4. Student will be able to equip with basics of communication skills and will apply it for
practical and oral purposes by being honed up in presentation skills and voice-dynamics.
5. Students will be able build up personal traits that will make the transition from institution
to workplace smoother and help them to excel in their jobs.
Contact
Content
Hours
Unit-1 Applied Grammar and Usage: 8
Transformation of Sentences: Simple, Compound and Complex, Subject-
verb agreement, Prefix and Suffix, Antonyms, Synonyms, Homophones,
Homonyms, New word Formation, Select word power
Unit-2: Listening and Speaking Skills 8
Active Listening :Meaning and Art of Listening, Traits of a Good Listener,
Listening modes, listening and Note taking, Types of Listening, Listening
Techniques using Ted Talk Audio listening with script reading, Pronunciation;
Speaking style ; content and sequencing.
Unit-3: Reading and Writing Skills: 8
Reading style: Skimming; Scanning; Churning & Assimilation, Effective writing
tools and methods: Inductive Deductive; Exposition; Linear; Interrupted; Spatial
& Chronological etc, Official and Business Letter writing, Agenda, Notices,
Minutes of meeting,
Unit-4: Presentation and Interaction Skills 8
Introduction to oral communication, Nuances and Modes of Speech Delivery,
Public speaking: confidence, clarity, and fluency, Individual Speaking: Elements;
Non verbal Communication: Kinesics, Paralinguistic features of Voice-Dynamics,
Proxemics, Chronemics, and Presentation Strategies: planning, preparation,
organization, delivery
Unit-5: Work- place skills: 8
Leadership qualities; Impact, Communication skills for Leaders: Listening and
Responding; Mental health at work place: Managing Stress; Techniques:
Application of 4 A’s; Avoid; Alter; Access; Adapt
Page 23 of 40

Course Outcomes:
1. Write professionally in simple and correct English.
2. Demonstrate active listening with comprehension, and the ability to write clear and well-
structured emails and proposals.
3. Learn the use of correct body language and tone of voice to enhance communication.
4. Acquire the skills necessary to communicate effectively and deliver presentations with clarity
and impact
5. Understand and apply some important aspects of core skills, like Leadership and stress
management.
Prescribed Books:
1. Technical Communication, (Second Ed.); O.U.P., Meenakshi Raman & S.Sharma New Delhi,
2011.
2. Business Communication for Managers, Payal Mehra, Pearson, Delhi, 2012.
3. Personality Development, Harold R. Wallace et. al, Cengage Learning India Pvt. Ltd; New Delhi
2006.
4. Practical Communication by L.U.B. Pandey; A.I.T.B.S. Publications India Ltd.; Krishan Nagar,
Delhi 2013.
5. Personality Development & Soft Skills, Barun K.Mitra, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 2012.
6. Public Speaking, William S. Pfeiffer, Pearson, Delhi, 2012.
7. Human Values, A.N. Tripathi, New Age International Pvt. Ltd. Publishers New Delhi, 2005.
8. English Grammar & Usage, R.P.Sinha, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 2005.
9. English Grammar & Composition, Wren & Martin S.Chand & Co Ltd, New Delhi, 2009.
10. Soft Skills for Everyone. Jeff Butterfield, Cengage Learning India Pvt. Ltd; New Delhi 2017.
Page 24 of 40

BAS151 / BAS251: ENGINEERING PHYSICS LAB
List of Experiments
Any ten experiments (at least four from each group).
Group A
1. To determine the wavelength of sodium light by Newton’s ring experiment.
2. To determine the wavelength of different spectral lines of mercury light using plane
transmission grating.
3. To determine the specific rotation of cane sugar solution using polarimeter.
4. To determine the focal length of the combination of two lenses separated by a distance
and verify the formula for the focal length of combination of lenses.
5. To measure attenuation in an optical fiber.
6. To determine the wavelength of He-Ne laser light using single slit diffraction.
7. To study the polarization of light using He-Ne laser light.
8. To determine the wavelength of sodium light with the help of Fresnel’s bi-prism.
9. To determine the coefficient of viscosity of a given liquid.
10. To determine the value of acceleration due to gravity (g) using compound pendulum.
Group B
1. To determine the energy band gap of a given semiconductor material.
2. To study Hall effect and determine Hall coefficient, carrier density and mobility of a
given semiconductor material using Hall effect setup.
3. To determine the variation of magnetic field with the distance along the axis of a current
carrying coil and estimate the radius of the coil.
4. To verify Stefan’s law by electric method.
5. To determine resistance per unit length and specific resistance of a given resistance
using Carey Foster's Bridge.
6. To study the resonance condition of a series LCR circuit.
7. To determine the electrochemical equivalent (ECE) of copper.
8. To calibrate the given ammeter and voltmeter by potentiometer.
9. To draw hysteresis (B-H curve) of a specimen in the form of a transformer and to
determine its hysteresis loss.
10. To measure high resistance by leakage method.
Course outcomes:
At the end of the course, students will be able to
Bloom’s
CO CO Statement
Level
Apply the principle of interference and diffraction to find the wavelength of
CO-1 Apply
monochromatic and polychromatic light.
Compute and analyze various electrical and electronic properties of a given
CO-2 Analyze
material by using various experiments.
Verify different established laws with the help of optical and electrical Apply
CO-3
experiments.
Determine and calculate various physical properties of a given material by using Apply
CO-4
various experiments.
Study and estimate the performance and parameter of given equipment by using Apply
CO-5
graphical and computational analysis.
Page 25 of 40

Reference Books
1. Practical Physics- K. K. Dey & B. N. Dutta (Kalyani Publishers New Delhi)
2. Engineering Physics-Theory and Practical- Katiyar & Pandey (Wiley India)
3. Engineering Physics Practical- S K Gupta ( Krishna Prakashan Meerut)
Page 26 of 40

BAS152 / BAS252 : ENGINEERING CHEMISTRY LAB
Course Objectives:
1. To enable the students to understand about the fundamental concepts of analytical instruments
2. To enable the students to understand about the analysis of chloride content, hardness, alkalinity
of water.
3. To enable the students to understand about the measure of pH, surface tension and viscosity of
a liquid.
4. To enable the students to understand about the preparation of different resins.
5. To enable the students to understand about the synthesis of organic compounds such as adipic
acid and paracetamol by conventional and green route.
LIST OF EXPERIMENTS
1. Calibration of Analytical Equipment and apparatus.
2. Determination of Hardness of water sample by EDTA method.
3. Determination of Alkalinity of water sample.
4. Determination of pH by titrimetric method.
5. Determination of surface tension of given liquid.
6. Determination of Viscosity of a given liquid by viscometer.
7. Determination of the strength of Ferrous ammonium sulfate using external indicator.
8. Determination of the strength of Potassium dichromate using internal indicator.
9. Determination of available chlorine in bleaching powder.
10. Determination of chloride content in water sample.
11. Preparation of Phenol formaldehyde (PF) resin.
12. Preparation of Urea formaldehyde (UF) resin.
13. Preparation of Adipic acid / Paracetamol.
14. Determination of Cell Conductance of a solution.
15. Determination of Rate constant of hydrolysis of esters.
16. Element detection and identification of functional groups in organic compounds.
NNNNOOOOTTTTEEEE:::: Instructor may choose any 10 experiments from above and may also change any two of the above..
Course Outcomes:
Upo n completion of the course the student should be able to:
Course Outcomes Bloom’s
Level
CO-1 Get an understanding of the use of different analytical instruments. K3
CO-2 Measure the molecular / system properties such as surface tension, K3
viscosity, conductance of solution, chloride and iron content in the water.
CO-3 Measure the hardness and alkalinity of the water. K3
CO-4 Know the fundamental concepts of the preparation of phenol K3
formaldehyde & urea formaldehyde resin, adipic acid and Paracetamol.
CO-5 Estimate the rate constant of reaction. K3
Page 27 of 40

BEE151 / BEE251 : BASIC ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING LAB
LIST OF EXPERIMENTS
Note: A minimum of ten experiments from the following should be performed.
(A) Hardware based experiments
1. Verification of Kirchhoff’s laws
2. Measurement of power and power factor in a single phase ac series inductive circuit and
study improvement of power factor using capacitor
3. Study of phenomenon of resonance in RLC series circuit and obtain resonant frequency.
4. Connection and measurement of power consumption of a fluorescent lamp (tube light).
5. Measurement of power in 3- phase circuit by two-wattmeter method and determination
of its power factor for star as well as delta connected load.
6. Determination of parameters of ac single phase series RLC circuit
7. Determination of (i) Voltage ratio (ii) polarity and (iii) efficiency by load test of a single
phase
Transformer
8. Determination of efficiency of a dc shunt motor by load test
9. To study running and speed reversal of a three phase induction motor and record speed
in both directions.
10. Demonstration of cut-out sections of machines: dc machine, three phase induction
machine, single-phase induction machine and synchronous machine.
(B) Experiments available on virtual lab
1. Kirchhoff‟s laws.
Virtual lab link: http://vlab.amrita.edu/?sub=3&brch=75&sim=217&cnt=2
2. Thevenin Theorem.
Virtual lab link: https://vlab.amrita.edu/?sub=1&brch=75&sim=313&cnt=1
3. RLC series resonance.
Virtual lab link: https://vlab.amrita.edu/?sub=1&brch=75&sim=330&cnt=1
4. Measurement of power in 3- phase circuit by two wattmeter method and determination
of its power factor for star as well as delta connected load.
Virtual lab link: http://vp-dei.vlabs.ac.in/Dreamweaver/measurement.html
5. Determination of parameters of ac single phase series RLC circuit.
Virtual lab link: https://vlab.amrita.edu/?sub=1&brch=75&sim=332&cnt=1
6. To observe the B-H loop of a ferromagnetic material in CRO.
Virtual lab link: https://vlab.amrita.edu/?sub=1&brch=282&sim=1507&cnt=2
7. Determination of the efficiency of a dc motor by loss summation method (Swinburne's
test). Virtual lab link: http://em-iitr.vlabs.ac.in/exp5/index.php?section=Theory
Page 28 of 40

Course Outcomes:
Course Outcome (CO) Bloom’s
Level
At the end of this course, the students should be able to:
Conduct experiments illustrating the application of KVL/KCL and network
CO 1 K
theorems to DC electrical circuits. 3
Demonstrate the behavior of AC circuits connected to single phase AC supply
CO 2 K
and measure power in single phase as well as three phase electrical circuits. 4
CO 3 Perform experiment illustrating BH curve of magnetic materials. K
3
CO 4 Calculate efficiency of a single phase transformer and DC machine. K
4
Perform experiments on speed measurement and reversal of direction of three
CO 5 phase induction motor and Identify the type of DC and AC machines based on K
4
their construction.
K – Remember, K – Understand, K – Apply, K – Analyze, K – Evaluate, K – Create
1 2 3 4 5 6
Page 29 of 40

BEC151 / BEC251: BASIC ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING LAB
Suggestive List of Experiments
Part A:
1. Study of various types of Active & Passive Components based on the ir ratings.
2. Identification of various types of Printed Circuit Boards (PCB) and soldering
Techniques.
3. PCB Lab: a. Artwork & printing of a simple PCB. b. Etching & drilling of PCB
4. Winding shop: Step down transformer winding of less than 5VA.
5. Soldering shop: Soldering and disordering of Resistor in PCB. Soldering
and disordering of IC in PCB. Soldering and disordering of Capacitor in
PCB
Part B:
1. Study of Lab Equipment and Components: CRO, Multimeter, and Function
Generator, Power supply-Active, Passive Components and Bread Board.
2. P-N Junction diode: Characteristics of PN Junction diode - Static and
dynamic resistance measurement from graph.
3. Applications of PN Junction diode: Half & Full wave rectifier-
Measurement of V , V , and ripple factor.
rms dc
4. Characteristics of Zener diode: V-I characteristics of zener diode, Graphical
measurement of forward and reverse resistance.
5. Characteristic of BJT: BJT in CE configuration.
6. To study Operational Amplifier as Adder and Subtractor
7. Verification of Truth Table of Various Logic Gate.
8. Implementation of the given Boolean function using logic gates in both
SOP and POS forms.
Part (C):
Part A PCB Lab: a. Artwork & printing of a simple This practical is not possible
PCB. b. Etching & drilling of PCB by virtual lab. It will be
conducted only in physical
mode
Part B Study of Lab Equipment’s and NA, These test equipment can
Components: CRO, Multi meter, be Demonstrated online from
Function Generator, any lab of ECE department or
Power supply- physical mode is only option.
Active, Passive Components
and Bread Board.
Page 30 of 40

(D) Experiments available on virtual lab
PN Junction on diode: Characteristics of PN http://vlabs.iitkgp.ernet.in/be/exp5/index.html
Junction diode-Static and dynamic
resistance measurement from graph.
Applications of PN Junction diode: Half & http://vlabs.iitkgp.ernet.in/be/exp6/index.ht
Full wave rectifier- Measurement of mlhttp://vlabs.iitkgp.ernet.in/be/exp7/index.
V ,V , and ripple factor. html
rms dc
Characteristics of Zener diode: V-I http://vlabs.iitkgp.ernet.in/be/exp10/index.html
characteristics of Zener diode, Graphical
measurement of forward and reverse
resistance.
Characteristic of BJT: BJT in CE http://vlabs.iitkgp.ernet.in/be/exp11/index.html
configuration.
To study Operational Amplifier as Adder http://vlabs.iitkgp.ernet.in/be/exp17/index.ht
and Subtractor mlhttp://vlabs.iitkgp.ernet.in/be/exp18/index.
html
Verification of Truth Table of Various https://de-iitr.vlabs.ac.in/digital-
Logic Gate electronics-iitr/exp/truth-table-gates/
Implementation of the given Boolean https://de-iitr.vlabs.ac.in/digital-
function using logic gates in both SOP and electronics-iitr/exp/realization-of-logic-
POS forms. functions/
Page 31 of 40

BCS151 / BCS251: PROGRAMMING FOR PROBLEM SOLVING
LAB
1. WAP that accepts the marks of 5 subjects and finds the sum and percentage marks
obtained
by the student.
2. WAP that calculates the Simple Interest and Compound Interest. The Principal,
Amount, Rate
of Interest and Time are entered through the keyboard.
3. WAP to calculate the area and circumference of a circle.
4. WAP that accepts the temperature in Centigrade and converts into Fahrenheit using the
formula C/5=(F-32)/9.
5. WAP that swaps values of two variables using a third variable.
6. WAP that checks whether the two numbers entered by the user are equal or not.
7. WAP to find the greatest of three numbers.
8. WAP that finds whether a given number is even or odd.
9. WAP that tells whether a given year is a leap year or not.
10. WAP that accepts marks of five subjects and finds percentage and prints grades
according to the following criteria:
Between 90-100%-----Print ‘A’
80-90%-----------------Print ‘B’
60-80%-----------------Print ‘C’
Below 60%-------------Print ‘D’
11. WAP that takes two operands and one operator from the user, perform the operation,
and prints the result by using Switch statement.
12. WAP to print the sum of all numbers up to a given number.
13. WAP to find the factorial of a given number.
14. WAP to print sum of even and odd numbers from 1 to N numbers.
15. WAP to print the Fibonacci series.
16. WAP to check whether the entered number is prime or not.
17. WAP to find the sum of digits of the entered number.
18. WAP to find the reverse of a number.
19. WAP to print Armstrong numbers from 1 to 100.
20. WAP to convert binary number into decimal number and vice versa.
21. WAP that simply takes elements of the array from the user and finds the sum of these
elements.
22. WAP that inputs two arrays and saves sum of corresponding elements of these arrays in
a third array and prints them.
23. WAP to find the minimum and maximum element of the array.
24. WAP to search an element in a array using Linear Search.
25. WAP to sort the elements of the array in ascending order using Bubble Sort technique.
Page 32 of 40

26. WAP to add and multiply two matrices of order nxn.
27. WAP that finds the sum of diagonal elements of a mxn matrix.
28. WAP to implement strlen (), strcat (),strcpy () using the concept of Functions.
29. Define a structure data type TRAIN_INFO. The type contain Train No.: integer type
Train name: string Departure Time: aggregate type TIME Arrival Time: aggregate type
TIME Start station: string End station: string The structure type Time contains two
integer members: hour and minute. Maintain a train timetable and implement the
following operations:
a. List all the trains (sorted according to train number) that depart from a particular
section.
b. List all the trains that depart from a particular station at a particular time.
c. List all he trains that depart from a particular station within the next one hour of
a given time.
d. List all the trains between a pair of start station and end station.
30. WAP to swap two elements using the concept of pointers.
31. WAP to compare the contents of two files and determine whether they are same or not.
32. WAP to check whether a given word exists in a file or not. If yes then find the number of
times it occurs.
Note:
a) The Instructor may add/delete/modify/tune experiments, wherever he/she feels in a justified
manner
b) The subject teachers are suggested to use the concept of project based learning. The subject
teacher may giver certain use cases/case studies where student is able to apply multiple
concepts in one single program
c) It is also suggested that open source tools should be preferred to conduct the lab. Some open
source online compiler to conduct the C lab are as follows:
 https://www.jdoodle.com/c-online-compiler/
 https://www.tutorialspoint.com/compile_c_online.php
 https://www.programiz.com/c-programming/online-compiler/
 https://www.hackerrank.com/
Mapping with Virtual Lab
Name of the Lab Name of the Experiment
Numerical Representation
Beauty of Numbers
More on Numbers
Factorials
String Operations
Problem Solving Lab
Recursion
Advanced Arithmatic
Searching and Sorting
Permutation
Sequences
Page 33 of 40

Course Outcomes:
Course Outcome Bloom’s
Level
At the end of course , the student will be able to:
Able to implement the algorithms and draw flowcharts for solving Mathematical K , K
CO 1 3 4
and Engineering problems.
Demonstrate an understanding of computer programming language concepts. K , K
CO 2 3 2
Ability to design and develop Computer programs, analyzes, and interprets the K , K
6 4
CO 3 concept of pointers, declarations, initialization, operations on pointers and their
usage.
Able to define data types and use them in simple data processing K , K
1 5
CO 4 applications he/she must be able to use the concept of array of
structures.
Develop confidence for self-education and ability for life-long learning K , K
CO 5 3 4
needed for Computer language.
Page 34 of 40

BAS155 / BAS255 : ENGLISH LANGUAGE LAB
Course Objectives:
1. To facilitate software based learning to provide the required English Language proficiency
to students.
2. To acquaint students with specific dimensions of communication skills i.e. Reading, Writing,
Listening, Thinking and Speaking.
3. To train students to use the correct and error-free writing by being well versed in rules of
English grammar.
4. To cultivate relevant technical style of communication and presentation at their work place
and also for academic uses.
5. To enable students to apply it for practical and oral presentation purposes by being honed
up in presentation skills and voice-dynamics.
Professional Communication Lab shall have two parts:
1-Interactive Communication Skills:
Students should practice the language with variety of activities and exercises based on
employability skills. Interactive and Communicative Practical with emphasis on Oral
Presentation/Spoken Communication, based on International Phonetic Alphabets
(I.P.A.)
LIST OF PRACTICALS
1. Group Discussion: Practical based on Accurate and Current Grammatical Patterns.
2. Conversational Skills for Interviews under suitable Professional Communication Lab
conditions with emphasis on Kinesics.
3. Communication Skills for Seminars/Conferences/Workshops with emphasis on
Paralinguistic/Kinesics.
4. Presentation Skills for Technical Paper/Project Reports/ proposals based on
proper Stress and Intonation Mechanics
5. Official/Public Speaking practice sessions based on suitable Rhythmic Patterns.
6. Theme Presentation/ Keynote Presentation based on correct methodologies of
argumentation
7. Individual Speech Delivery/Conferencing with skills to defend Interjections/Quizzes.
8. Argumentative Skills/Role Play Presentation with Stress and Intonation.
9. Comprehension Skills based on Reading and Listening Practical’s on a model Audio
10. Startup presentations, Video portfolio, Extempore, Role play, Just a Minute (JAM) etc.
2-Computer assisted software based Language Learning:
Software based self-guided learning to provide the required English language proficiency
to students from an employability and career readiness standpoint. The software should
align to Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) and deliver a
CEFR level – B2 upon completion.
Page 35 of 40

Course Outcome:
1. Students will be enabled to understand the basic objective of the course by being acquainted
with specific dimensions of communication skills i.e. Reading, Writing, Listening, Thinking and
Speaking.
2. Students would be able to create substantial base by the formation of strong professional
vocabulary for its application at different platforms and through numerous modes as
Comprehension, reading, writing and speaking etc.
3. Students will apply it at their work place for writing purposes such as Presentation/official
drafting/administrative communication and use it for document/project/report/research paper
writing.
4. Students will be made to evaluate the correct and error-free writing by being well-versed in
rules of English grammar and cultivate relevant technical style of communication &presentation
at their work place and also for academic uses.
5. Students will apply it for practical and oral presentation purposes by being honed up in
presentation skills and voice-dynamics. They will apply techniques for developing interpersonal
communication skills and positive attitude leading to their professional competence.
Suggested Softwares:
• Oxford Achiever by Oxford University Press.
• Cambridge English Empower by Cambridge University Press.
• MePro. by Pearson India Education Services Pvt. Ltd.
• New Interactions by McGraw-Hill India.
Reference Books:
1. Word Power Made Easy by Norman Lewis, W.R.Goyal Pub. & Distributors, 2009, Delhi.
2. Manual of Practical Communication by L.U.B. Pandey; A.I.T.B.S. Publications India Ltd.; Krishan
Nagar,2013, Delhi
3. Practical Communication Process & Practice, LU.B. Pandey: A.I.T.B.S. Pub. India Ltd Krishna
Nagar, Delhi, 2013.
4. English Grammar and Usage by R.P. Sinha, Oxford University Press, 2005, New Delhi.
5. English Grammar, Composition and Usage by N.K.Agrawal & F.T.Wood, Macmillan India Ltd.,
New Delhi.
6. Effective Communication Skill, Kulbhusan Kumar, RS Salaria, Khanna Publishing House
7. English Grammar & Composition by Wren & Martin, S.Chand & Co. Ltd., New Delhi.
8. Communication Skills for Engineers and Scientists, Sangeeta Sharma et.al. PHI Learning Pvt.Ltd,
2011, New Delhi.
9. Personality Development, Harold R. Wallace &L.Ann Masters, Cengage Learning, New Delhi
10. Personality Development & Soft Skills, Barun K.Mitra, Oxford University Press, 2012 New Delhi.
11. Business Correspondence and Report Writing by Prof. R.C. Sharma & Krishna Mohan, Tata
McGraw Hill & Co. Ltd., 2001, New Delhi.
12. Developing Communication Skills by Krishna Mohan, Meera Bannerji- Macmillan India Ltd. 1990,
Delhi.
13. Spoken English- A manual of Speech and Phonetics by R.K.Bansal & J.B.Harrison, Orient
Blackswan, 2013, New Delhi.
14. Business English by Ken Taylor, Orient Blackswan, 2011, New Delhi
Page 36 of 40

BCE151/ BCE251: ENGINEERING GRAPHICS & DESIGN LAB
Course Objectives:
• To prepare the students for the effective technical communication.
• To provide them exposure of techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for
engineering practice.
• To prepare the students to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs
within realistic constraints around them in professional life.
Contact
Content
Hours
Unit-1: Introduction to Engineering Drawing and Orthographic Projections 8
Principles of Engineering Graphics and their significance.
Dimensioning, Lettering.
Scales: Plain, Diagonal and Engineering Scales.
Orthographic Projection, Projection of Point, Projection of Lines: Projection of straight lines;
Projection of lines inclined to one plane and both planes.
Unit-2: Projection of Planes and Solids 8
Projection of polygonal surface and circular lamina located in first quadrant inclined to one
or both reference planes.
Classification of solids, Projection of solids like prisms, pyramids, cylinder and cone when
the axis is inclined to one reference plane by change of position method.
Unit-3: Sections of Regular Solids and development of Surfaces 8
Sections of Solids: Right regular solids and Auxiliary views for the true shape of the sections
such as Prism, Cylinder, Pyramid, and Cone.
Development of surfaces for various regular solids such as Prism, Cylinder, Pyramid and
Cone.
Unit-4: Isometric Projection 8
Isometric Projection: Isometric scales, Isometric projections of simple and combination of
solids. Perspective Projection: Orthographic representation of perspective views — Plane
figures and simple solids — Visual Ray Method. Conversion of pictorial view into
orthographic Projection.
Unit-5: Introduction to Computer Aided Design 8
Introduction to AutoCAD: Basic commands for 2D drawing: Line, Circle, Polyline,
Rectangle, Hatch, Fillet, Chamfer, Trim, Extend, Offset, Dim style, etc. Transformation of
Projections: Conversion of Isometric Views to Orthographic Views and Vice-Versa in
AutoCAD. Geometry and topology of engineered components: creation of engineering
models and their presentation in standard 2D blueprint form.
Page 37 of 40

Course Outcome:
After completion, of course students will be able to:
CO 1: Use scales and draw projections of objects.
CO 2: Explain views of solids and their sectional surfaces.
CO 3: Analyze and draw isometric projections of objects.
CO 4: Demonstrate orthographic representation of perspective views using modern tools.
CO 5: Apply AutoCAD software for creation of engineering drawing and models
.
Suggested Text/ Reference Books:
1. Bhatt N.D., Panchal V.M. & Ingle P.R. (2014), Engineering Drawing, Charotar Publishing House.
2. Shah, M.B. & Rana B.C. (2008), Engineering Drawing and Computer Graphics, Pearson Education
3. Agrawal B. & Agrawal C.M. (2012), Engineering Graphics, TMH Publication
4. Engineering Graphics & Design, A.P. Gautam & Pradeep Jain, Khanna Publishing House
5. Narayana, K.L. & P Kannaiah (2008), Text book on Engineering Drawing, Scitech Publishers.
6. (Corresponding set of) CAD Software Theory and User Manuals.
Page 38 of 40

BWS151/ BWS251: WORKSHOP PRACTICE LAB
S. No. Mechanical Workshop Duration
Introduction to Mechanical workshop material, tools and
1 3 Hrs
machines
To study layout, safety measures and different engineering materials (mild
steel, medium carbon steel, high carbon steel, high speed steel and cast iron
etc) used in workshop.
To study and use of different types of tools, equipment, devices & machines
used in fitting, sheet metal and welding section.
To determine the least count of Vernier calliper, vernier height gauge,
micrometer (Screw gauge) and take different reading over given metallic
pieces using these instruments.
2 Machine shop 3 Hrs
Demonstration of working, construction and accessories for Lathe machine
Perform operations on Lathe - Facing, Plane Turning, step turning, taper
turning, threading, knurling and parting.
3 Fitting shop 3 Hrs
1. Practice marking operations.
2. Preparation of U or V -Shape Male Female Work piece which contains:
Filing, Sawing, Drilling, Grinding.
4 Carpentry Shop 3 Hrs
Study of Carpentry Tools, Equipment and different joints.
Making of Cross Half lap joint, Half lap Dovetail joint and Mortise Tenon
Joint
5 Welding Shop 6 Hrs
Introduction to BI standards and reading of welding drawings.
Practice of Making following operations
Butt Joint
Lap Joint
TIG Welding
MIG Welding
6 Moulding and Casting Shop 6 Hrs
Page 39 of 40

Introduction to Patterns, pattern allowances, ingredients of moulding sand
and melting furnaces.
Foundry tools and their purposes
Demo of mould preparation and Aluminum casting
Practice – Study and Preparation of mould for Plastic
7 CNC Shop 6 Hrs
Study of main features and working parts of CNC machine and accessories
that can be used. Perform different operations on metal components using
any CNC machines
8 To prepare a product using 3D printing 3 Hrs
Total 33 Hrs
Course Outcome:
Blooms
The students will be able to
Level
CO1 Use various engineering materials, tools, machines and measuring equipments. K3
CO2 Perform machine operations in lathe and CNC machine. K3
CO3 Perform manufacturing operations on components in fitting and carpentry shop. K3
CO4 Perform operations in welding, moulding, casting and gas cutting. K3
CO5 Fabricate a job by 3D printing manufacturing technique K3
Reference Books:
1. Workshop Practice, H S Bawa, McGraw Hill
2. Mechanical Workshop Practice, K C John, PHI
3. Workshop Practice Vol 1, and Vol 2, by HazraChoudhary , Media promoters and Publications
4. CNC Fundamentals and Programming, By P. M. Agrawal, V. J. Patel, Charotar Publication.
Page 40 of 40